Consensus Layer Wiki Page (#246)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/CL/overview.md

### Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) and Byzantine Generals' Problem

Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) is a property of distributed systems that allows them to function correctly even when some components fail or act maliciously. BFT is crucial in decentralized networks, where trust among nodes cannot be assumed. In other words, a system exhibiting BFT can tolerate Byzantine faults, which are arbitrary failures that include malicious behavior. For a system to be Byzantine fault-tolerant, it must reach consensus despite these faults. For more on the problem and practical solutions read [this](https://hackmd.io/@kira50/SknuPZMIC).

## Introduction to Consensus Layer (CL)

> Consensus is a way to build reliable distributed systems with unreliable components. Blockchain-based distributed systems aim to agree on a single history of transactions.
>
> Proof-of-Work and Proof-of-stake are not consensus protocols, but enable consensus protocols. In Ethereum, Nodes and validators are the actors of the consensus system. Slots and epochs regulate consensus time. Blocks and attestations are the currency of consensus.

> The Consensus Layer (CL) is a fundamental component that ensures the network's security, reliability, and efficiency. Originally, Ethereum utilized Proof-of-Work (PoW) as its consensus mechanism, similar to Bitcoin. PoW, while effective in maintaining decentralization and security, has significant drawbacks, including high energy consumption and limited scalability. To address these issues, Ethereum has transitioned to Proof-of-Stake (PoS), a more sustainable and scalable consensus mechanism.

Author: Can you clarify more on that

> The Consensus Layer (CL) is a fundamental component that ensures the network's security, reliability, and efficiency. Originally, Ethereum utilized Proof-of-Work (PoW) as its consensus mechanism, similar to Bitcoin. PoW, while effective in maintaining decentralization and security, has significant drawbacks, including high energy consumption and limited scalability. To address these issues, Ethereum has transitioned to Proof-of-Stake (PoS), a more sustainable and scalable consensus mechanism.

Author: resolved

## Transition to Proof-of-Stake

> The engine was changed mid-flight! September 15, 2022 — the day Ethereum switched to Proof-of-Stake. That new engine is the Consensus Layer, formerly known as Ethereum 2.0’s Beacon Chain.

The Paris hard fork (The merge) in Ethereum was activated based on "terminal total difficulty" (TTD) instead of block height to avoid risks like malicious forks. This ensures the transition to Proof-of-Stake (PoS) occurs only when the cumulative difficulty reaches a critical threshold. The terminal block is the last Proof-of-Work (PoW) block where its total difficulty surpasses a predefined threshold, ensuring security. The total difficulty is calculated recursively, reflecting the computational effort in the blockchain. Please refer this for more details on the [transition criteria](https://hackmd.io/@kira50/rJ2y7jImR) and [Total Terminal Difficulty](https://bordel.wtf).

This is relevant because testnets, devnets and any Ethereum network running the latest software needs to activate the Merge - not by block height but by Total Terminal Difficulty (TTD).

> Upon reaching the terminal block:

Author: fixed the flow

- **Participating in Consensus**: Validators participate in consensus by voting on the state of the blockchain at regular intervals, helping to finalize the blockchain's state.

The Paris hard fork was a pivotal event in Ethereum's history, setting the stage for more scalable, sustainable, and secure operations. It represents Ethereum's commitment to innovation and its responsiveness to the broader societal concerns about the environmental impact of cryptocurrency mining.

## Beacon Chain and its preliminaries

The Beacon Chain is the backbone of Ethereum’s consensus. It coordinates validators, manages the PoS protocol, and ensures consensus across the network. This section with cover the anatomy of Beacon chain.

### Validators

Validators are essentially the participants in the PoS Protocol. They propose and validate new blocks, ensuring the integrity and security of the blockchain. Validators must stake ETH as collateral, aligning their interests with the network’s health. Validators are chosen to propose blocks based on several factors:

> - **Staked Ether**: Each validator can stake a maximum of 32 ETH. Stakers with more ETH can increase their influence by running multiple validator nodes, each staking 32 ETH. This system ensures decentralization and aligns the interests of validators with the network's security and integrity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Staked Ether**: Each validator must stake 32 ETH to activate validator software. Validators with more ETH can increase their influence by running multiple validator nodes, each staking 32 ETH. This system ensures decentralization and aligns the interests of validators with the network's security and integrity.
```

- **Randomness**: The selection process incorporates cryptographic randomness to prevent predictability and manipulation. This is achieved through the [RANDAO](https://inevitableeth.com/home/ethereum/network/consensus/randao) and [VDF (Verifiable Delay Function)](https://inevitableeth.com/home/ethereum/upgrades/consensus-updates/vdf) mechanisms.
- **Committees**: Validators are grouped into committees for block proposal and attestation. Each committee is responsible for validating and attesting to blocks, ensuring a decentralized and secure validation process.

> - **Staking Requirements**: To become a validator, an individual must deposit a minimum of 32 ETH into the official deposit contract. This ETH acts as collateral to incentivize honest behavior. The validator's ETH is at risk if they fail to perform their duties or engage in malicious activities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Staking Requirements**: To become a validator, an individual must deposit a minimum of 32 ETH into the official deposit contract. This deposit acts as collateral to incentivize honest behavior. The validator's ETH is at risk if they fail to perform their duties or engage in malicious activities.
```

Author: using ETH here seems correct

<a id="img_slots_epochs"></a>

<figure class="diagram" style="margin-left:10%; width:80%">

![Diagram for slots and epoch](../../images/cl/slots-and-epochs.png)

<figcaption style="margin-left: 15%">

_The first 32 slots are in Epoch 0. Genesis block is at Slot 0._

</figcaption>
</figure>

### Validators and Attestations

A block proposer is a validator that has been pseudo-randomly selected to build a block. Validators propose blocks and attest to the blocks proposed by others. Most of the time, validators are attesters that vote on blocks. These votes are recorded in the Beacon Chain and determine the head of the Beacon Chain.

Attestations are votes on the validity of the blocks, which are aggregated into the Beacon Chain to ensure consensus. 

<a id="img_validators"></a>

<figure class="diagram" style="margin-left:10%; width:80%">

![Diagram for Validator selection](../../images/cl/validators.png)

<figcaption style="margin-left: 15%">

_A slot can be missed as you can see in this diagram on 28th slot_

</figcaption>
</figure>

> An **attestation** is a validator’s vote, weighted by the validator’s balance.  Attestations are broadcasted by validators in addition to blocks. Validators also police each other and are rewarded for reporting other validators that make conflicting votes, or propose multiple blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **attestation** is a validator’s vote, weighted by the validator’s stake.  Attestations are broadcasted by validators in addition to blocks. Validators also police each other and are rewarded for reporting other validators that make conflicting votes, or propose multiple blocks.
```

<a id="img_checkpoints"></a>
<figure class="diagram" style="text-align:center">

![Diagram for checkpoints](../../images/cl/checkpoints.jpg)

<figcaption>

_Checkpoints for a scenario where epoch contain 64 slots_

</figcaption>
</figure>

For example, if Slots 65 to 128 are empty, the Epoch 2 checkpoint defaults to the block at Slot 64. Similarly, if Slot 192 is empty, the Epoch 3 checkpoint is the block at Slot 180. **Epoch boundary blocks (EBB)** is a term in some literature (such as the [Gasper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.03052) paper, the source of the diagram above and a later one), and they can be considered synonymous with checkpoints.

Validators cast two types of votes: **LMD GHOST** votes for blocks and **Casper FFG** votes for checkpoints. An **FFG** vote includes a source checkpoint from a previous epoch and a target checkpoint from the current epoch. For example, a validator in Epoch 1 might vote for a source checkpoint at the genesis block and a target checkpoint at Slot 64, repeating the same vote in Epoch 2. Only Validators assigned to a slot cast LMD GHOST votes, while all validators cast FFG votes for epoch checkpoints.

> #### Supermajority and Finality:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Supermajority and Finality
```

When a user transaction is included in a block, On average it would be somewhere in the middle of an epoch. It takes half an epoch (about 3.2 minutes) to reach the next checkpoint, suggesting transaction finality of 2.5 epochs: 16 minutes. Optimally, more than ⅔ of attestations will have been included by the 22nd (2/3rd of 32) slot of an epoch. Thus, transaction finality is an average of 14 minutes (16+32+22 slots). Block confirmations emerge from a block’s attestations, then move to its justification, to its finality. Use cases can decide whether they need finality or an earlier safety threshold is sufficient.

<a id="img_finality"></a>
<figure class="diagram" style="text-align:center">

![Diagram for Finality](../../images/cl/finalization.png)

<figcaption>

> _Example of one checkpoint getting justified (Slot 64) nd finalizing a prior checkpoint (Slot 32)._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Example of one checkpoint getting justified (Slot 64) and finalizing a prior checkpoint (Slot 32)._
```

These nodes often use [consumer grade hardware](https://stakefromhome.com/) and communicate over internet connections that may be slow, lose data, or disconnect unexpectedly. Node operators might misconfigure their software or fail to update it. Additionally, there could be many bad actors running rogue nodes or tampering with communications for personal gain. This is what we mean by "unreliable infrastructure."

## Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) and Byzantine Generals' Problem

Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) is a property of distributed systems that allows them to function correctly even when some components fail or act maliciously. BFT is crucial in decentralized networks, where trust among nodes cannot be assumed. In other words, a system exhibiting BFT can tolerate Byzantine faults, which are arbitrary failures that include malicious behavior. For a system to be Byzantine fault-tolerant, it must reach consensus despite these faults.

> #### Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT)

Reviewer 2: I would cut the section here. I don't think it's necessary to explain pBFT here or the generals problem. I would just link it as a resources in the previous part. 

The page is long and with this intro, it starts very slow

Author: Reorganizing this

Therefore, the only way to achieve consensus in these types of distributed system is by having at least ⅔ or more reliable and honest network nodes. This means that if the majority of the network decides to act maliciously, the system is susceptible to failures and attacks (such as the 51% attack).

In blockchain and distributed ledger systems, the Byzantine Generals' Problem is analogous to nodes (validators or miners) needing to agree on the state of the ledger despite some nodes potentially acting maliciously.

## Introduction to Consensus Layer (CL)

**tldr;**

> > - Consensus is a way to build reliable distributed systems with unreliable components.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is a good definition but again, I would ditch tldr bullet points for more contextual summary because some of these points independently don't make much sense or inform reader

Author: re-wrote this

> - Blockchain-based distributed systems aim to agree on a single history of transactions.
> - Proof-of-Work and Proof-of-stake are not consensus protocols, but enable consensus protocols.
> - Nodes and validators are the actors of the consensus system.
> - Slots and epochs regulate consensus time.
> - Blocks and attestations are the currency of consensus.

The Consensus Layer (CL) is a fundamental component that ensures the network's security, reliability, and efficiency. Originally, Ethereum utilized Proof-of-Work (PoW) as its consensus mechanism, similar to Bitcoin. PoW, while effective in maintaining decentralization and security, has significant drawbacks, including high energy consumption and limited scalability. To address these issues, Ethereum has transitioned to Proof-of-Stake (PoS), a more sustainable and scalable consensus mechanism.

> The Ethereum network consists of many individual nodes. Each node operates independently and communicates over the Internet, which is often unreliable and asynchronous. A node might always behave correctly, or it might be faulty in various ways: being offline, using a different protocol version, trying to mislead other nodes, sending contradictory messages, or experiencing other issues.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this was also explained elsewhere, maybe it could be shorter or reference the protocol overview.

Author: I removed it from the initial the BFT explanation

Ethereum's consensus protocol actually "bolts together" two different consensus protocols. One is called [LMD GHOST](/wiki/CL/cl-architecture), the other [Casper FFG](link to arch casper). The combination has become known as [Gasper](). In subsequent sections we will be looking at these both separately and in combination.

## Proof-of-Work and Proof-of-stake

This is a good point to clarify that neither Proof-of-Work (PoW) nor Proof-of-Stake (PoS) are consensus protocols by themselves. They are often incorrectly referred to as such, but they are actually mechanisms that enable consensus protocols. Both PoW and PoS primarily serve as Sybil resistance mechanisms, placing a cost on participating in the protocol. This prevents attackers from overwhelming the system cheaply.

> However, both PoW and PoS are closely linked to the consensus mechanisms they support through [fork choice](/wiki/link-to-fork-choice-cl-arch) rules. They help assign a weight or score to a chain of blocks: in PoW, it's the total computational work done; in PoS, it's the total value staked that supports a particular chain. Beyond these basics, PoW and PoS can support various consensus protocols, each with its own dynamics and trade-offs.

Reviewer 2: the link needs a fix here?

Author: fixed this

### Block chains

The basic element of a blockchain is the block. A block contains a set of transactions assembled by a leader (block proposer). The contents of a block can vary based on the protocol.

- The payload of a block on Ethereum's execution chain is a list of user transactions.
- In the pre-Merge PoS Beacon Chain, a block's payload was mostly a set of attestations by validators.
- Post-Merge Beacon Chain blocks also include the execution payload (user transactions).
- After [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844)(Deneb upgrade), blocks now also contain commitments to opaque data blobs alongside user transactions.

Except for the Genesis block, each block builds on and points to a parent block, forming a chain of blocks: a blockchain. The goal is for all nodes on the network to agree on the same blockchain history.

<a id="img_blockchain"></a>

<figure class="diagram" style="text-align:center">

![Diagram for Block Chain](../../images/cl/blockchain.svg)

<figcaption>

_Time moves from left to right and, except for the Genesis block, each block points to the parent block it builds on._

</figcaption>
</figure>

> The chain grows as nodes add new blocks to its tip. This is done by temporarily selecting a "leader", the node that extends the chain. In PoW, the leader is the miner who first solves the PoW puzzle for its block. In Ethereum's PoS, the leader is pseudo-randomly selected from active stakers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The chain grows as nodes add new blocks to its tip. This is done by temporarily selecting a "leader", the node that extends the chain. In PoW, the leader is the miner who first solves the PoW puzzle for its block. In Ethereum's PoS, the proposer is pseudo-randomly selected from active validator set.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion

> 

Reviewer 2: I would ditch bitcoin and blocksize war reference here. Just mention the gas limit of block which limits its size and enables set a baseline for node resources

Author: removed it

The leader (block proposer) adds a block to the chain, choosing and ordering its contents. The block must be valid according to protocol rules, or the network will ignore it. Using blocks is an optimization. Adding individual transactions one by one would create a huge consensus overhead. So blocks are batches of transactions, and sometimes [people argue](https://www.bitrawr.com/bitcoin-block-size-debate-explained) about how big those blocks should be. The size of these blocks can vary:

In Bitcoin, block size is limited by the number of bytes. In Ethereum's execution chain, block size is limited by the block gas limit (the amount of work needed to process the transactions). [Beacon block](link to beaconblock class) sizes are limited by hard-coded constants.

> ### Forks and ChainId

Reviewer 2: I would omit this section. Chaind is a basic network spec which is independent of consensus mechanism and I don't see how it's relevant here

Author: Omitted this

The Paris hard fork marked a significant transition for Ethereum, shifting its consensus mechanism from Proof-of-Work (PoW) to Proof-of-Stake (PoS). This change represents a fundamental shift in how blocks are validated and new transactions are added to the blockchain. The transition to Proof-of-Stake (PoS) in Ethereum aimed to address the limitations of Proof-of-Work (PoW), particularly its high energy consumption and scalability issues. PoS is designed to be more efficient and secure by relying on validators who stake ETH as collateral. As I mentioned earlier, not everyone agrees to protocol changes, so there are still some clients who didn't upgrade and now run a separate chain/fork called Ethereum PoW (ETHW).

> ## Transition to Proof-of-Stake

Reviewer 2: I think the Merge is relevant here but I am not sure if it's the right place. It could be part of History page for example. It should also highlight that this is relevant because testnets, devnets and any Ethereum network running the latest software needs to activate the Merge - not by block hight but TTD. Btw you can reference bordel.wtf for the ttd calculation :)

Author: Summarized it and added some more relevance context
